.nh
.TH PROTONUP-RS(1) | User Commands

.SH NAME
protonup-rs \- install and manage Proton/Wine and other game runtimes


.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBprotonup-rs\fR [OPTIONS]


.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBprotonup-rs\fP is a program to automate the installation and update of
Linux Gaming Compatibility tools, such as GEProton, Luxtorpeda, Boxtron,
and others.

.PP
Run without arguments to start the interactive TUI mode.
Use the options below for non-interactive (CLI) operation.


.SH OPTIONS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB-q\fR, \fB--quick-download\fR:
Skip the menu, auto-detect installed applications (Steam, Lutris),
and download the latest versions of their default compatibility tools.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB-f\fR, \fB--force\fR:
Force re-installation for already existing tools during quick downloads.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB--tool\fR \fITOOL\fP:
Compatibility tool to install. Case-insensitive name.
Supported tools:

\fBGEProton\fP (Steam, Lutris), \fBLuxtorpeda\fP (Steam),
\fBBoxtron\fP (Steam), \fBVKD3D-Proton\fP (Lutris),
\fBLutris-VKD3D\fP (Lutris), \fBDXVK\fP (Lutris),
\fBKron4ek Wine\fP (Lutris), \fBGEProton RTSP\fP (Steam),
\fBProton CachyOS\fP (Steam, Lutris)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB--version\fR \fIVERSION\fP:
Version to install. Use \fBlatest\fP for the latest release.
Only used together with \fB--tool\fR\&.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB--for\fR \fITARGET\fP:
Target for installation. Accepted values:

\fBsteam\fP, \fBSteam\fP  - Install to Steam (Native or Flatpak)
\fBlutris\fP, \fBLutris\fP  - Install to Lutris (Native or Flatpak)
\fIpath\fP                - Any other value is treated as a custom
                        installation path (supports \fB~\fR expansion)

If omitted, the target is auto-detected based on the tool's
compatible applications and what is installed.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB-w\fR, \fB--whats-new\fR:
Show release notes for the latest versions of default tools.
When combined with \fB-q\fR, shows release notes before and after downloading.
When combined with \fB--tool\fR, shows release notes for the selected tool
and then proceeds with the installation.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR:
Print help and exit.


.SH INSTALL DIRECTORIES
\fBSteam (Native):\fP
    \fB~/.steam/steam/compatibilitytools.d/\fR

.PP
\fBSteam (Flatpak):\fP
    \fB~/.var/app/com.valvesoftware.Steam/data/Steam/compatibilitytools.d/\fR

.PP
\fBLutris (Native):\fP
    Wine-based tools: \fB~/.local/share/lutris/runners/wine/\fR
    Runtime tools:   \fB~/.local/share/lutris/runtime/\fR

.PP
\fBLutris (Flatpak):\fP
    Wine-based tools: \fB~/.var/app/net.lutris.Lutris/data/lutris/runners/wine/\fR
    Runtime tools:   \fB~/.var/app/net.lutris.Lutris/data/lutris/runtime/\fR

.PP
\fBCustom:\fP
    The provided path is used directly (extracted in-place).


.SH EXAMPLES
\fBTUI mode (interactive):\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs\fR

.PP
\fBQuick update (auto-detect and download):\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs -q\fR

.PP
\fBQuick update, force re-install, and show release notes:\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs -q -f -w\fR

.PP
\fBInstall latest GEProton for Steam (auto-detected):\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs --tool GEProton\fR

.PP
\fBInstall specific version for Lutris:\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs --tool GEProton --version 8.26 --for lutris\fR

.PP
\fBInstall to a custom path:\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs --tool GEProton --version latest --for ~/.local/steam\fR

.PP
\fBForce overwrite existing installation:\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs --tool GEProton --for steam --force\fR

.PP
\fBCheck release notes without downloading:\fP
    \fBprotonup-rs --whats-new\fR


.SH ENVIRONMENT
\fBHOME:\fP
    Used implicitly for resolving \fB~\fR in custom paths.

.EX
**protonup-rs** does not read any other environment variables for
configuration.
.EE


.SH TEMPORARY FILES
Downloads are extracted to standard temporary directories.
  If \fB/tmp\fR has insufficient space, the fallback is:
  \fB~/.local/state/protonup-rs/tmp/\fR

.PP
These are cleaned up automatically on exit.


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBProject homepage:\fP https://github.com/auyer/protonup-rs
  \fBAPI documentation:\fP https://docs.rs/libprotonup

.PP
Related tools and projects:
.IP \(bu 2
GEProton: https://github.com/GloriousEggroll/proton-ge-custom
.IP \(bu 2
Luxtorpeda: https://github.com/luxtorpeda-dev/luxtorpeda
.IP \(bu 2
Boxtron: https://github.com/dreamer/boxtron
.IP \(bu 2
VKD3D-Proton: https://github.com/HansKristian-Work/vkd3d-proton
.IP \(bu 2
DXVK: https://github.com/doitsujin/dxvk
.IP \(bu 2
Kron4ek Wine: https://github.com/kron4ek/Wine-Builds
.IP \(bu 2
GEProton RTSP: https://github.com/SpookySkeletons/proton-ge-rtsp
.IP \(bu 2
Proton CachyOS: https://github.com/CachyOS/proton-cachyos


.SH AUTHOR
Maintained by \fBRafael Passos\fP (@auyer) https://rcpassos.me


.SH BUGS
Report issues at: https://github.com/auyer/protonup-rs/issues
